---
layout: post
series: ar
title: "The March Proverb Challenge"
lesson: 11
categories: [cs]
tags: [ramsey, budgeting, behavior]
---

March Proverbs  - 
<span style="color:rgb(200,0,0);">Day 27 complete</span>
<br>01:07 the wise follow the words of the Lord but the fools despise wisdom and instruction
<br>01:08 your parents instructions are a gift (v commandment honor thy mother and thy father so you can life a long life)
<br>01:10 avoid ill gotten gains, they and the methods you used to get them will destroy you.
<br>01:20 the simple (gullible unwise) mock the wise, do not mock the wise - listen to them, or when your unwise actions have their consequences, the wise will not help you. 
<br>01:27 the waywardness and simplicity of fools will eventually destroy them
<br>
<br><b>PROVERB 2 Moral Benefits of Wisdom</b> 
<br>02:01 If you accept the words that God shares with you - and upon him - and search for it like hidden treasue - then you will find the knowledge of God
<br>02:06 The Lord gives wisdom - He holds success in store and guard the right and just and protect their ways.
<br>02:07 If you keep on the right and just path - you will become wise - be discering
<br>02:12 Wisdom will save you from the ways of wicked men with perverse words who walk in the dark and delight in the wrong and evil.
<br>02:16 ..... and from wayward women with their seductive words :) :)
<br>02:20 Walk in the ways of the good and keep to the path of rightousness for the upright will live in the land and the wicked will be torn from it.

<br><br>03:05 Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not on your own understanding; in all your ways submit to him, and he will make your paths straight. The Lord disciplines those he loves, as a father the son he delights in.
<br>03:13 Blessed are those who find wisdom, those who gain understanding, for she is more profitable than silver and yields better returns than gold. Nothing you desire can compare with her. Long life is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honor. Her ways are pleasant ways, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to those who take hold of her; those who hold her fast will be blessed. 
<br>03:21 Do not let wisdom and understanding out of your sight, preserve sound judgment and discretion; they will be life for you. 
<br>03:27 Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in your power to act. Do not say to your neighbor, “Come back tomorrow and I’ll give it to you”— when you already have it with you. 
<br>03:29 Do not plot harm against your neighbor, who lives trustfully near you. 
<br>03:30 Do not accuse anyone for no reason— when they have done you no harm. 
<br>03:33 The Lord’s curse is on the house of the wicked, but he blesses the home of the righteous. He mocks proud mockers but shows favor to the humble and oppressed. 

<p><br><br><b>06:16 There are six things the Lord hates, seven that are detestable to him:</b>
<br>1: haughty eyes, 
<br>2: a lying tongue, 
<br>3: hands that shed innocent blood, 
<br>4: a heart that devises wicked schemes, 
<br>5: feet that are quick to rush into evil, 
<br>6: a false witness who pours out lies 
<br>7: and a person who stirs up conflict in the community. 
<br>

<br><br>07:10 Watch out for those with crafty intent
<br>08:05 Gain Prudence and Peak the truth
<br>08:13 Hate Evil, Pride and Arrogance

<br><br><b>Seven Wisdoms</b>
<br>Trust ----------------- Prov 11:13
<br>Integrity ------------- Prov 10:09
<br>Purity ---------------- Prov 11:20
<br>Generosity ------------ Prov 11:24-26
<br>Diligence ------------- Prov 10:04
<br>Wise Words ------------ Prov 10:11/13/14
<br>Wise Counsel ---------- Prov 11:14

<br><br>11:12 Avoid Assholes 

<br>

<br>12:04 A wife of noble character is her husband’s crown, but a disgraceful wife is like decay in his bones. 
<br>12:09 Better to be a nobody and yet have a servant than pretend to be somebody and have no food. 
<br>12:10 The righteous care for the needs of their animals, but the kindest acts of the wicked are cruel. 
<br>12:11 Those who work their land will have abundant food, but those who chase fantasies have no sense. 
<br>12:15 The way of fools seems right to them, but the wise listen to advice. 
<br>12:16 Fools show their annoyance at once, but the prudent overlook an insult. 
<br>12:18 The words of the reckless pierce like swords, but the tongue of the wise brings healing. 
<br>12:22 The Lord detests lying lips, but he delights in people who are trustworthy. 
<br>12:23 The prudent keep their knowledge to themselves, but a fool’s heart blurts out folly. 
<br>12:25 Anxiety weighs down the heart, but a kind word cheers it up. 
<br>12:26 The righteous choose their friends carefully, but the way of the wicked leads them astray. 
<br>

<br><br>13:01 A wise son heeds his father’s instruction,          but a mocker does not respond to rebukes. 
<br>13:03 Those who guard their lips preserve their lives,     but those who speak rashly will come to ruin. 
<br>13:04 A sluggard’s appetite is never filled,               but the desires of the diligent are fully satisfied. 
<br>13:07 One person pretends to be rich, yet has nothing;     another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth. 
<br>13:10 Where there is strife, there is pride,              but wisdom is found in those who take advice. 
<br>13:11 Dishonest money dwindles away,                      but whoever gathers money little by little makes it grow. 
<br>13:12 Hope deferred makes the heart sick,                 but a longing fulfilled is a tree of life. 
<br>13:13 Whoever scorns instruction will pay for it,         but whoever respects a command is rewarded. 
<br>13:14 The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life,     turning a person from the snares of death. 
<br>13:15 Good judgment wins favor,                           but the way of the unfaithful leads to their destruction.[a] 
<br>13:18 Whoever disregards discipline comes to poverty and shame,     but whoever heeds correction is honored. 
<br>13:20 Walk with the wise and become wise,                 for a companion of fools suffers harm. 
<br>13:22 A good person leaves an inheritance for their children’s children, but a sinner’s wealth is stored up for the righteous. 
<br>13:24 Whoever spares the rod hates their children,        but the one who loves their children is careful to discipline them. 
<br>

<br><br>14:01 The wise woman builds her house,            but with her own hands the foolish one tears hers down.
<br>14:06 The mocker seeks wisdom and finds none,    but knowledge comes easily to the discerning.
<br>14:07 Stay away from a fool,     for you will not find knowledge on their lips.
<br>14:09 Fools mock at making amends for sin,      but goodwill is found among the upright.
<br>14:10 Each heart knows its own bitterness,         and no one else can share its joy.
<br>14:15 The simple believe anything,      but the prudent give thought to their steps.
<br>14:17 A quick-tempered person does foolish things,     and the one who devises evil schemes is hated.
<br>14:20 The poor are shunned even by their neighbors,     but the rich have many friends.
<br>14:21 It is a sin to despise one’s neighbor,     but blessed is the one who is kind to the needy.
<br>14:23 All hard work brings a profit,     but mere talk leads only to poverty.
<br>14:29 Whoever is patient has great understanding,     but one who is quick-tempered displays folly.
<br>14:30 A heart at peace gives life to the body,     but envy rots the bones.
<br>14:31 Whoever oppresses the poor shows contempt for their Maker,     but whoever is kind to the needy honors God.
<br>14:33 Wisdom reposes in the heart of the discerning     and even among fools she lets herself be known.[b]
<br>14:34 Righteousness exalts a nation,     but sin condemns any people.
<br><br>
 
<br>15:01 A gentle answer turns away wrath,     but a harsh word stirs up anger. 
<br>15:06 The house of the righteous contains great treasure,     but the income of the wicked brings ruin. 
ockers resent correction, so they avoid the wise. 
<br>15:13 A happy heart makes the face cheerful,but heartache crushes the spirit. 
<br>15:17 Better a small serving of vegetables with love than a fattened calf with hatred. 
<br>15:18 A hot-tempered person stirs up conflict, but the one who is patient calms a quarrel. 
<br>15:22 Plans fail for lack of counsel, but with many advisers they succeed. 
<br>15:23 A person finds joy in giving an apt reply— and how good is a timely word! 
<br>15:27 The greedy bring ruin to their households, but the one who hates bribes will live. 
<br>15:32 Those who disregard discipline despise themselves, but the one who heeds correction gains understanding. 
<br>15:33 Wisdom’s instruction is to fear the Lord, and humility comes before honor. 

<br><br>

<br>16:05 The Lord detests all the proud of heart.     Be sure of this: They will not go unpunished. 
<br>16:08 Better a little with righteousness, than much gain with injustice. 
<br>16:16 How much better to get wisdom than gold, to get insight rather than silver! 
<br>16:18 Pride goes before destruction, a haughty spirit before a fall. 
<br>16:24 Gracious words are a honeycomb, sweet to the soul and healing to the bones. 
<br>16:31 Gray hair is a crown of splendor;     it is attained in the way of righteousness. 
<br>16:32 Better a patient person than a warrior,     one with self-control than one who takes a city. 
<br>
<br>
<br>17:01 Better a dry crust with peace and quiet, than a house full of feasting, with strife. 
<br>17:02 A prudent servant will rule over a disgraceful son, and will share the inheritance as one of the family. 
<br>17:03 The crucible for silver and the furnace for gold, but the LORD tests the heart. 
<br>17:05 (Schaudenfruede) Whoever mocks the poor shows contempt for their Maker; whoever gloats over disaster will not go unpunished. 
<br>17:06 Children’s children are a crown to the aged, and parents are the pride of their children. 
<br>17:10 A rebuke impresses a discerning person more than a hundred lashes a fool. 
<br>17:11 Evildoers foster rebellion against God; 
<br>17:14 Starting a quarrel is like breaching a dam; so drop the matter before a dispute breaks out. 
<br>17:16 Why should fools have money in hand to buy wisdom, when they are not able to understand it? 
<br>17:17 A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for a time of adversity. 
<br>17:18 One who has no sense shakes hands in pledge, and puts up security for a neighbor. 
<br>17:21 To have a fool for a child brings grief; there is no joy for the parent of a godless fool. 
<br>17:27 The one who has knowledge uses words with restraint, and whoever has understanding is even-tempered. 
<br>17:28 Even fools are thought wise if they keep silent, snd discerning if they hold their tongues. 
<br>
<br>
<br>18:18 An unfriendly person pursues selfish ends; and against all sound judgment starts quarrels. 
<br>18:02 Fools find no pleasure in understanding; but delight in airing their own opinions. 
<br>18:08 The words of a gossip are like choice morsels; they go down to the inmost parts. 
<br>18:09 One who is slack in his work is brother to one who destroys. 
<br>18:12 Before a downfall the heart is haughty, but humility comes before honor. 
<br>18:13 To answer before listening; that is folly and shame. 
<br>18:16 A gift opens the way and ushers the giver into the presence of the great. 
<br>18:18 Casting the lot settles disputes and keeps strong opponents apart. 
<br>18:19 A brother wronged is more unyielding than a fortified city; disputes are like the barred gates of a citadel. 
<br>18:20 From the fruit of their mouth a person’s stomach is filled; with the harvest of their lips they are satisfied. 
<br>18:22 He who finds a wife finds what is good and receives favor from the Lord. 
<br>18:23 The poor plead for mercy, but the rich answer harshly. 
<br>18:24 One who has unreliable friends soon comes to ruin, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother. 
<br>
<br>
<br>19:03 A person’s own folly leads to their ruin, yet their heart rages against the Lord. 
<br>19:04 Wealth attracts many friends, but even the closest friend of the poor person deserts them. 
<br>19:06 Many curry favor with a ruler, and everyone is the friend of one who gives gifts. 
<br>19:07 The poor are shunned by all their relatives— how much more do their friends avoid them! Though the poor pursue them with pleading,     they are nowhere to be found.[a] 
<br>19:08 The one who gets wisdom loves life; the one who cherishes understanding will soon prosper. 
<br>19:11 A person’s wisdom yields patience;     it is to one’s glory to overlook an offense. 
<br>19:13 A foolish child is a father’s ruin, and a quarrelsome wife is like the constant dripping of a leaky roof. 
<br>19:14 Houses and wealth are inherited from parents, but a prudent wife is from the Lord. 
<br>19:18 Discipline your children, for in that there is hope; do not be a willing party to their death. 
<br>19:19 A hot-tempered person must pay the penalty; rescue them, and you will have to do it again. 
<br>19:22 What a person desires is unfailing love[b]; better to be poor than a liar. 
<br>19:26 Whoever robs their father and drives out their mother is a child who brings shame and disgrace. 
<br>
<br>
<br>20:01 Wine is a mocker and beer a brawler;     whoever is led astray by them is not wise. 
<br>20:03 It is to one’s honor to avoid strife,     but every fool is quick to quarrel. 
<br>20:05 The purposes of a person’s heart are deep waters,     but one who has insight draws them out. 
<br>20:10 Differing weights and differing measures— the Lord detests them both. 
<br>20:11 Even small children are known by their actions,     so is their conduct really pure and upright? 
<br>20:15 Gold there is, and rubies in abundance,     but lips that speak knowledge are a rare jewel. 
<br>20:16 Take the garment of one who puts up security for a stranger;     hold it in pledge if it is done for an outsider. 
<br>20:17 Food gained by fraud tastes sweet,     but one ends up with a mouth full of gravel. 
<br>20:18 Plans are established by seeking advice;     so if you wage war, obtain guidance. 
<br>20:19 A gossip betrays a confidence;     so avoid anyone who talks too much. 
<br>20:21 An inheritance claimed too soon  will not be blessed at the end. 
<br>20:22 Do not say, “I’ll pay you back for this wrong!” - Wait for the Lord, and he will avenge you. 
<br>20:23 The Lord detests differing weights, and dishonest scales do not please him. 
<br>20:27 The human spirit is[a] the lamp of the Lord , that sheds light on one’s inmost being. 
<br>20:29 The glory of young men is their strength, gray hair the splendor of the old. 
<br>
<br>
<br>21:03 To do what is right and just is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice. 
<br>21:09 Better to live on a corner of the roof than share a house with a quarrelsome wife. 
<br>21:13 Whoever shuts their ears to the cry of the poor will also cry out and not be answered. 
<br>21:14 A gift given in secret soothes anger, and a bribe concealed in the cloak pacifies great wrath. 
<br>21:19 Better to live in a desert than with a quarrelsome and nagging wife. 
<br>21:20 The wise store up choice food and olive oil, but fools gulp theirs down. 
<br>21:23 Those who guard their mouths and their tongues keep themselves from calamity. 
<br>21:24 The proud and arrogant person—“Mocker” is his name— behaves with insolent fury. 
<br>21:30 There is no wisdom, no insight, no plan that can succeed against the Lord. 
<br>
<br>22:01 A good name is more desirable than great riches;     to be esteemed is better than silver or gold. 
<br>22:02 Rich and poor have this in common:     The Lord is the Maker of them all. 
<br>22:03 The prudent see danger and take refuge,     but the simple keep going and pay the penalty. 
<br>22:06 Start children off on the way they should go,     and even when they are old they will not turn from it. 
<br>22:07 The rich rule over the poor,     and the borrower is slave to the lender. 
<br>22:10 Drive out the mocker, and out goes strife;     quarrels and insults are ended. 
<br>22:15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a child,     but the rod of discipline will drive it far away. 
<br>22:16 One who oppresses the poor to increase his wealth     and one who gives gifts to the rich—both come to poverty. 
<br><br><b>Thirty Sayings of the Wise</b>
<br>Saying 1 22:17-21
 Pay attention and turn your ear to the sayings of the wise; apply your heart to what I teach, 
for it is pleasing when you keep them in your heart and have all of them ready on your lips. 
So that your trust may be in the Lord, I teach you today, even you. Have I not written thirty sayings for you, sayings of counsel and knowledge, 
teaching you to be honest and to speak the truth, so that you bring back truthful reports     to those you serve? 
<br>Saying 2 22:22-23
Do not exploit the poor because they are poor and do not crush the needy in court, for the Lord will take up their case 
and will exact life for life. 
<br>Saying 3 22:24-25
Do not make friends with a hot-tempered person, do not associate with one easily angered, 
or you may learn their ways and get yourself ensnared. 
<br>Saying 4 22:26-27 
Do not be one who shakes hands in pledge or puts up security for debts; 
if you lack the means to pay, your very bed will be snatched from under you. 
<br>Saying 5 22:28
Do not move an ancient boundary stone set up by your ancestors. 

<br>
<br>
<br>Saying 7 23:01-03 
When sit to dine with a ruler, note well what is before you, and put a knife to your throat if you are given to gluttony. Do not crave his delicacies, 
for that food is deceptive. 
<br>Saying 8 23:04-05
Do not wear yourself out to get rich; do not trust your own cleverness. Cast but a glance at riches, and they are gone, 
for they will surely sprout wings and fly off to the sky like an eagle. 
<br>Saying 9 23:06-08
Do not eat the food of a begrudging host, do not crave his delicacies; for he is the kind of person who is always thinking about the cost.
“Eat and drink,” he says to you, but his heart is not with you. You will vomit up the little you have eaten and will have wasted your compliments. 
<br>Saying 10 23:09
Do not speak to fools, for they will scorn your prudent words. 
<br>Saying 11 23:10-11 
Do not move an ancient boundary stone or encroach on the fields of the fatherless, for their Defender is strong; he will take up their case against you. 
<br>Saying 12 23:12
Apply your heart to instruction and your ears to words of knowledge. 
<br>Saying 13 23:13-14
Do not withhold discipline from a child; if you punish them with the rod, they will not die. Punish them with the rod and save them from death. 
<br>Saying 14 23:15-16
My son, if your heart is wise, then my heart will be glad indeed; my inmost being will rejoice when your lips speak what is right. 
<br>Saying 15 23:17-18
Do not let your heart envy sinners, but always be zealous for the fear of the Lord. There is surely a future hope for you, and your hope will not be cut off. 
<br>Saying 16 23:19-21
Listen, my son, and be wise, and set your heart on the right path: Do not join those who drink too much wine or gorge themselves on meat, 
for drunkards and gluttons become poor, and drowsiness clothes them in rags. 
<br>Saying 17 23:22-25
Listen to your father, who gave you life, and do not despise your mother when she is old. Buy the truth and do not sell it— wisdom, instruction and insight as well. 
The father of a righteous child has great joy; a man who fathers a wise son rejoices in him. May your father and mother rejoice; may she who gave you birth be joyful! 
<br>Saying 18 23:26-28
My son, give me your heart and let your eyes delight in my ways, for an adulterous woman is a deep pit, and a wayward wife is a narrow well. 
Like a bandit she lies in wait and multiplies the unfaithful among men. 
<br>Saying 19 23:29-35 (A long one!)
<br>Who has woe? Who has sorrow? 
    Who has strife? Who has complaints? 
    Who has needless bruises? Who has bloodshot eyes? 
<br>Those who linger over wine, who go to sample bowls of mixed wine. 
<br>Do not gaze at wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly! 
In the end it bites like a snake and poisons like a viper. 
Your eyes will see strange sights, and your mind will imagine confusing things. 
You will be like one sleeping on the high seas, lying on top of the rigging. 
“They hit me,” you will say, “but I’m not hurt! They beat me, but I don’t feel it! 
When will I wake up so I can find another drink?” 

<br>
<br>Saying 20 24:01-02
Do not envy the wicked, do not desire their company; for their hearts plot violence, and their lips talk about making trouble. 
<br>Saying 21 24:03-04
By wisdom a house is built, and through understanding it is established; through knowledge its rooms are filled with rare and beautiful treasures. 
<br>Saying 22 24:05-06
The wise prevail through great power, and those who have knowledge muster their strength. Surely you need guidance to wage war, and victory is won through many advisers. 
<br>Saying 23 24:07 
Wisdom is too high for fools; in the assembly at the gate they must not open their mouths. 
<br>Saying 24 24:08-09
Whoever plots evil will be known as a schemer. The schemes of folly are sin, and people detest a mocker. 
<br>Saying 25 24:10-12
If you falter in a time of trouble, how small is your strength! Rescue those being led away to death; hold back those staggering toward slaughter. 
If you say, “But we knew nothing about this,” does not he who weighs the heart perceive it? Does not he who guards your life know it? 
Will he not repay everyone according to what they have done? 
<br>Saying 26 24:13-14 
Eat honey, my son, for it is good; honey from the comb is sweet to your taste. Know also that wisdom is like honey for you: If you find it, there is a future hope for you, and your hope will not be cut off. 
<br>Saying 27 24:15-16
Do not lurk like a thief near the house of the righteous, do not plunder their dwelling place; for though the righteous fall seven times, they rise again, but the wicked stumble when calamity strikes. 
<br>Saying 28 24:17-18
Do not gloat when your enemy falls; when they stumble, do not let your heart rejoice, or the Lord will see and disapprove and turn his wrath way from them. 
<br>Saying 29 24:19-20
Do not fret because of evildoers or be envious of the wicked, for the evildoer has no future hope, and the lamp of the wicked will be snuffed out. 
<br>Saying 30 24:21-22 
Fear the Lord and the king, my son, and do not join with rebellious officials, for those two will send sudden destruction on them, and who knows what calamities they can bring? 
<br><br>Further Sayings of the Wise 
<br>24:23-25 These also are sayings of the wise: To show partiality in judging is not good: Whoever says to the guilty, “You are innocent,” 
    will be cursed by peoples and denounced by nations. But it will go well with those who convict the guilty, and rich blessing will come on them. 
<br>24:26 An honest answer is like a kiss on the lips. 
<br>24:27 Put your outdoor work in order and get your fields ready; after that, build your house. 
<br>24:28 Do not testify against your neighbor without cause— would you use your lips to mislead? 
<br>24:29 Do not say, “I’ll do to them as they have done to me; I’ll pay them back for what they did.” 
<br>24:30-31 I went past the field of a sluggard,  the vineyard of someone who has no sense; 
thorns had come up everywhere, the ground was covered with weeds, and the stone wall was in ruins. 
I applied my heart to what I observed and learned a lesson from what I saw: 
<br>A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest— and poverty will come on you like a thief 
and scarcity like an armed man. 


<br>25:01 These are more proverbs of Solomon, compiled by the men of Hezekiah king of Judah: 
<br>25:04 Remove the dross from the silver, and a silversmith can produce a vessel; 
<br>25:06 Do not exalt yourself in the king’s presence, and do not claim a place among his great men; 
<br>25:07 it is better for him to say to you, “Come up here,” than for him to humiliate you before his nobles. 
<br>25:14 Like clouds and wind without rain is one who boasts of gifts never given. 
<br>25:16 If you find honey, eat just enough— too much of it, and you will vomit. 
<br>25:17 Seldom set foot in your neighbor’s house— too much of you, and they will hate you. 
<br>25:19 Like a broken tooth or a lame foot is reliance on the unfaithful in a time of trouble. 
<br>25:20 Like one who takes away a garment on a cold day, or like vinegar poured on a wound, 
<br>25:24 Better to live on a corner of the roof than share a house with a quarrelsome wife. 
<br>25:26 Like a muddied spring or a polluted well are the righteous who give way to the wicked. 
<br>25:27 It is not good to eat too much honey, nor is it honorable to search out matters that are too deep. 
<br>25:28 Like a city whose walls are broken through is a person who lacks self-control. 
<br>
<br>26:03 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a rod for the backs of fools! 
<br>26:04 Do not answer a fool according to his folly, or you yourself will be just like him. 
<br>26:06 Sending a message by the hands of a fool is like cutting off one’s feet or drinking poison. 
<br>26:07 Like the useless legs of one who is lame is a proverb in the mouth of a fool. 
<br>26:11 As a dog returns to its vomit, so fools repeat their folly. 
<br>26:12 Do you see a person wise in their own eyes? There is more hope for a fool than for them. 
<br>26:17 Like one who grabs a stray dog by the ears is someone who rushes into a quarrel not their own. 
<br>26:18 Like a maniac shooting flaming arrows of death -- is one who deceives their neighbor -- and says, “I was only joking!” 
<br>26:20 Without wood a fire goes out; without a gossip a quarrel dies down. 
<br>26:21 As charcoal to embers and as wood to fire, so is a quarrelsome person for kindling strife. 
<br>26:27 Whoever digs a pit will fall into it; if someone rolls a stone, it will roll back on them. 
<br>26:28 A lying tongue hates those it hurts, and a flattering mouth works ruin. 
<br><br>
<br>

<br>27:01 Do not boast about tomorrow, for you do not know what a day may bring. 
<br>27:02 Let someone else praise you, and not your own mouth; an outsider, and not your own lips. 
<br>27:06 Wounds from a friend can be trusted,     but an enemy multiplies kisses. 
<br>27:07 One who is full loathes honey from the comb,     but to the hungry even what is bitter tastes sweet. 
<br>27:08 Like a bird that flees its nest is anyone who flees from home. 
<br>27:09 Perfume and incense bring joy to the heart,     and the pleasantness of a friend     springs from their heartfelt advice. 
<br>27:10 Do not forsake your friend or a friend of your family,     and do not go to your relative’s house when disaster strikes you—better a neighbor nearby than a relative far away. 
<br>27:11 Be wise, my son, and bring joy to my heart;     then I can answer anyone who treats me with contempt. 
<br>27:12 The prudent see danger and take refuge,     but the simple keep going and pay the penalty. 
<br>27:13 Take the garment of one who puts up security for a stranger;     hold it in pledge if it is done for an outsider. 
<br>27:15 A quarrelsome wife is like the dripping of a leaky roof in a rainstorm; restraining her is like restraining the wind or grasping oil with the hand. 
<br>27:19 As water reflects the face, so one’s life reflects the heart.
<br>27:23 Be sure you know the condition of your flocks, give careful attention to your herds; for riches do not endure forever, 
and a crown is not secure for all generations. When the hay is removed and new growth appears and the grass from the hills is gathered in, the lambs will provide you with clothing, 
and the goats with the price of a field. You will have plenty of goats’ milk to feed your family and to nourish your female servants. 
 

<br><br>28:01 The wicked flee though no one pursues, but the righteous are as bold as a lion. 
<br>28:04 Those who forsake instruction praise the wicked,  but those who heed it resist them. 
<br>28:05 Evildoers do not understand what is right,     but those who seek the Lord understand it fully. 
<br>28:06 Better the poor whose walk is blameless than the rich whose ways are perverse. 
<br>28:07 A discerning son heeds instruction,     but a companion of gluttons disgraces his father. 
<br>28:09 If anyone turns a deaf ear to my instruction,     even their prayers are detestable. 
<br>28:11 The rich are wise in their own eyes;     one who is poor and discerning sees how deluded they are. 
<br>28:12 When the righteous triumph, there is great elation;     but when the wicked rise to power, people go into hiding. 
<br>28:13 Whoever conceals their sins does not prosper,     but the one who confesses and renounces them finds mercy. 
<br>28:14 Blessed is the one who always trembles before God,     but whoever hardens their heart falls into trouble. 
<br>28:17 Anyone tormented by the guilt of murder     will seek refuge in the grave;     let no one hold them back. 
<br>28:19 Those who work their land will have abundant food, but those who chase fantasies will have their fill of poverty. 
<br>28:20 A faithful person will be richly blessed, but one eager to get rich will not go unpunished. 
<br>28:21 To show partiality is not good— yet a person will do wrong for a piece of bread. 
<br>28:22 The stingy are eager to get rich and are unaware that poverty awaits them. 
<br>28:23 Whoever rebukes a person will in the end gain favor rather than one who has a flattering tongue. 
<br>28:24 Whoever robs their father or mother and says, “It’s not wrong,” is partner to one who destroys. 
<br>28:27 Those who give to the poor will lack nothing, but those who close their eyes to them receive many curses. 
<br>

<br>29:03 A man who loves wisdom brings joy to his father, but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth. 
<br>29:04 By justice a king gives a country stability, but those who are greedy for bribes tear it down. 
<br>29:06 Evildoers are snared by their own sin,     but the righteous shout  for joy and are glad. 
<br>29:07 The righteous care about justice for the poor,     but the wicked have no such concern. 
<br>29:08 Mockers stir up a city, but the wise turn away anger. 
<br>29:12 If a ruler listens to lies, all his officials become wicked. 
<br>29:13 The poor and the oppressor have this in common:     The Lord gives sight to the eyes of both. 
<br>29:14 If a king judges the poor with fairness, his throne will be established forever. 
<br>29:15 A rod and a reprimand impart wisdom,     but a child left undisciplined disgraces its mother. 
<br>29:17 Discipline your children, and they will give you peace;     they will bring you the delights you desire. 
<br>29:20 Do you see someone who speaks in haste? There is more hope for a fool than for them. 
<br>29:22 An angry person stirs up conflict, and a hot-tempered person commits many sins. 
<br>29:26 Many seek an audience with a ruler, but it is from the Lord that one gets justice. 


<br><br>Prov 30: Sayings of Agur 
<br>30:01 The sayings of Agur son of Jakeh—an inspired utterance. 
<br>30:06 Do not add to his words,     or he will rebuke you and prove you a liar. 
<br>30:07 “Two things I ask of you, Lord;     do not refuse me before I die: 
<br>30:08 Keep falsehood and lies far from me;     give me neither poverty nor riches,     but give me only my daily bread. 
<br>30:09 Otherwise, I may have too much and disown you      and say, ‘Who is the Lord?’ Or I may become poor and steal,     and so dishonor the name of my God. 
<br>30:17 “The eye that mocks a father, that scorns an aged mother, will be pecked out by the ravens of the valley, will be eaten by the vultures. 
<br>30:24 “Four things on earth are small,     yet they are extremely wise: 
<br>30:25 Ants are creatures of little strength,     yet they store up their food in the summer; 
<br>30:26 hyraxes are creatures of little power,     yet they make their home in the crags; 
<br>30:27 locusts have no king,     yet they advance together in ranks; 
<br>30:28 a lizard can be caught with the hand,     yet it is found in kings’ palaces. 
<br>30:29-30 “There are three things that are stately in their stride, four that move with stately bearing: a lion, mighty among beasts, who retreats before nothing; a strutting rooster, a he-goat, 
and a king secure against revolt.[b] 



<br>
<br>Proverbs 31 Sayings of King Lemuel 
<br>31:01 The sayings of King Lemuel—an inspired utterance his mother taught him. 
02 Listen, my son! Listen, son of my womb!     Listen, my son, the answer to my prayers! 
03 Do not spend your strength[a] on women,     your vigor on those who ruin kings. 
04 It is not for kings, Lemuel—     it is not for kings to drink wine,     not for rulers to crave beer, 
05 lest they drink and forget what has been decreed,     and deprive all the oppressed of their rights. 
06 Let beer be for those who are perishing,     wine for those who are in anguish! 
07 Let them drink and forget their poverty     and remember their misery no more. 
08 Speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves,     for the rights of all who are destitute. 
09 Speak up and judge fairly;     defend the rights of the poor and needy. 

Epilogue: The Wife of Noble Character 
10 [b]A wife of noble character who can find?     She is worth far more than rubies. 
11 Her husband has full confidence in her     and lacks nothing of value. 
12 She brings him good, not harm,     all the days of her life. 
13 She selects wool and flax     and works with eager hands. 
14 She is like the merchant ships,     bringing her food from afar. 
15 She gets up while it is still night; she provides food for her family      and portions for her female servants. 
16 She considers a field and buys it;     out of her earnings she plants a vineyard. 
17 She sets about her work vigorously;     her arms are strong for her tasks. 
18 She sees that her trading is profitable,  and her lamp does not go out at night. 
19 In her hand she holds the distaff and grasps the spindle with her fingers. 
20 She opens her arms to the poor  and extends her hands to the needy. 
21 When it snows, she has no fear for her household;     for all of them are clothed in scarlet. 
22 She makes coverings for her bed;     she is clothed in fine linen and purple. 
23 Her husband is respected at the city gate,     where he takes his seat among the elders of the land. 
24 She makes linen garments and sells them,     and supplies the merchants with sashes. 
25 She is clothed with strength and dignity;     she can laugh at the days to come. 
26 She speaks with wisdom,     and faithful instruction is on her tongue. 
27 She watches over the affairs of her household     and does not eat the bread of idleness. 
28 Her children arise and call her blessed;     her husband also, and he praises her: 
29 “Many women do noble things,     but you surpass them all.” 
30 Charm is deceptive, and beauty is fleeting; but a woman who fears the Lord is to be praised. 
31 Honor her for all that her hands have done, and let her works bring her praise at the city gate. 


<br> Definitions:
<br> ---- Simplicity ----------- Foolishness or Gullibility (Listening to bad actors)
<br>

  
</p>

<p><a href="https://thelonggamejournal.github.io/">← Home</a></p>


